# useImperativeHandle

## what is useImperativeHandle
useImperativeHandle customizes the instance value that is exposed to parent components when using ref. This line is quite confusing but lets see what it means. We all know react has a feature called unidirectional data flow meaning data flow can happen from parent to child even though there are some React API and third party JS library to transfer data in any direction but React data flow in uni-directional. But what if we want to get some value from the child and we dont want to introduce any API or library. Well useImperativeHandle hook along with ref object created by useRef() and forwardRef() help us to achieve the above requirement. Basically this hook exposed the properties we decalre in the child component to the parent component but for that useImperativeHandle need the help of ref and forwardRef. Now the way we write the code is called imperative programming. Imperative programming means that we describe how we want the result step by step or in details. So we are telling useImperativeHandle hook imperatively what to do or  which property to exposed to the parent component exactly. It takes a ref object which we pass from the parent component and a callback function which returns a JS object containing key-value pair where the value is the object what we want to expose to the parent component. And right in the export statement of the child component, we need to wrap the component with forwardRef so that we can use the ref object in any of the jsx element of this child component. So we can see that, we are telling React what to do step by step which is Imperative programming and React Documentation warns us to avoid this sort of code as much as we can. We should use it only if there is on other way that can solve our problems.

In this app I used useImperativeHandle hook to exposed a function and a variable from child to parent component. Simply I created a ref using useRef and passed it to the child component. In the child component, I first export the component with forwardRef so the child component can access the ref object. Then I declare the useImperativeHandle hook by passing the ref object as first argument and a callback function as second argument. In the callback function I simply return a JS object where the value will be accessed by parent component by calling the key of this object.

Hope that helps a bit.
Thank you and happy conding ...